Debugging schemas (#506)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/guides/debugging-schema-names.md

:::info 
The full explanation on custom schemas can be found [here](using-custom-schemas).
:::

You can also follow along via this video:

<LoomVideo id="1c6e33b504da432dbd07c4cb7f35478e" />

### 1. Search for a macro named `generate_schema_name`
Do a file search to check if you have a macro named `generate_schema_name` in the `macros` directory of your project.

#### I do not have a macro named `generate_schema_name` in my project
This means that you are using dbt's default implementation of the macro, as defined [here](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt/blob/dev/kiyoshi-kuromiya/core/dbt/include/global_project/macros/etc/get_custom_schema.sql#L17-L30)

<!--- CC note: this link is going to keep going out of date --->

```sql
{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}
```

> Note that this logic 

Reviewer: 👁️ 👁️

---
title: Debugging schema names
---

> If you using the [`schema` config](resource-configs/schema), and your model is being created in a schema that you are not expecting, here are the steps to debug it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a model uses the [`schema` config](resource-configs/schema) but builds under an unexpected schema, here are some steps for debugging the issue.
```

:::info 
The full explanation on custom schemas can be found [here](using-custom-schemas).
:::

You can also follow along via this video:

<LoomVideo id="1c6e33b504da432dbd07c4cb7f35478e" />

### 1. Search for a macro named `generate_schema_name`
Do a file search to check if you have a macro named `generate_schema_name` in the `macros` directory of your project.

#### I do not have a macro named `generate_schema_name` in my project
This means that you are using dbt's default implementation of the macro, as defined [here](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt/blob/dev/kiyoshi-kuromiya/core/dbt/include/global_project/macros/etc/get_custom_schema.sql#L17-L30)

> <!--- CC note: this link is going to keep going out of date --->

Reviewer 2: Wait, I'm confused. If the link will keep going out of date...should we find an alternate solution or just not have it? Was this meant to be something to check on later before throwing up the PR? Help me out with the context :)

Author: We don't have one long-lived branch in the dbt repo, instead we promote the latest "dev/" branch to be the default branch and work on that. This link points to the current "dev/" branch, but as soon as we start working on the next release, it won't reflect the latest code. As far as I can tell, there's no way to tell GitHub to just go to the default branch's version of this file

{%- endmacro %}
```
Your project is switching out the `generate_schema_name` macro for another macro, `generate_schema_name_for_env`. Similar to the above example, this is a macro which is defined in dbt's global project, [here](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt/blob/dev/kiyoshi-kuromiya/core/dbt/include/global_project/macros/etc/get_custom_schema.sql#L43-L56).

```sql
{% macro generate_schema_name_for_env(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if target.name == 'prod' and custom_schema_name is not none -%}

        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}
```
#### I have a `generate_schema_name` macro with custom logic

If this is the case — it might be a great idea to reach out to the person who added this macro to your project, as they will have context here — you can use [GitHub's blame feature](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/managing-files-in-a-repository/tracking-changes-in-a-file) to do this.

In all cases take a moment to read through the Jinja to see if you can follow the logic.

### 2. Confirm your `schema` config

> Check if you are using the [`schema` config](resource-configs/schema) in your model, either via a `{{ config() }}` block, or from `dbt_project.yml`. This gets passed through to the macro as the `custom_schema_name` argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check if you are using the [`schema` config](resource-configs/schema) in your model, either via a `{{ config() }}` block, or from `dbt_project.yml`. In both cases, dbt passes this value as the `custom_schema_name` parameter of the `generate_schema_name` macro.
```

Just trying to avoid passive voice.

### 3. Confirm your target values
Most `generate_schema_name` macros incorporate logic from the [`target` variable](target), in particular `target.schema` and `target.name`. Use the docs [here](target) to help you find the values of each key in this dictionary.

### 4. Put the two together

Now, re-read through the logic of your `generate_schema_name` macro, and mentally plug in your `customer_schema_name` and `target` values.

You should find that the schema dbt is constructing for your model matches the output of your `generate_schema_name` macro.

:::info
Note that snapshots do not follow this behavior, check out the docs on [target_schema](resource-configs/target_schema) instead.
:::

### 4. Adjust as necessary

Now that you understand how a model's schema is being generated, you can adjust as necessary:
- You can adjust the logic in your `generate_schema_name` macro (or add this macro to your project if you don't yet have one and adjust from there)
- You can also adjust your `target` details (for example, changing the name of a target)

> If you change the logic in `generate_schema_name`, it's important that you consider whether two users will end up writing to the same schema when in development — we thought ahead for you by implementing name-spaced logic in the the default `generate_schema_name` macro (but acknowledge that we might have been a little too clever here 😅).

Reviewer 2: I'm wonder what this parenthetical at the end actually refers to. I always love the personality but it's too vague for me to parse at the moment. If you want to keep the conversational aspect--which I encourage--explain more clearly how we might been a bit too clever. (e.g. but we also acknowledge we may have been a little too clever trying to keep things namespaced). 

I just felt when reading this that there is a conversation about development that I'm only passingly familiar with.
